# PREFACE

What is Sindarin?
- an Elvish language invented by J.R.R. Tolkien as part of his
  fictional world of Middle-earth.
- the Elvish languages predated and inspired the creation of
  Middle-earth, _The Hobbit_, and _The Lord of the Rings_.

Why study Sindarin?
- the languages are the seed of Tolkien's creation. To really
  understand and appreciate _The Lord of the Rings_, it helps
  if you get to know Tolkien's languages.
- Sindarin is beautiful -- "the moment of association between
  sound and sense"
- it will help you learn other languages, or learn linguistics
- maybe you'd like to use the language for roleplaying, fanfic,
  journaling, or secret communication.

Differences between Sindarin
and Neo-Sindarin.
- Tolkien never finished his Elvish languages, and his known
  writings on Sindarin often contradict each other. The grammar
  of the language is incomplete. There are some things, like
  the grammar of "If I had known about it then, I would have
  wanted you to go with me" that we don't have a clue how to translate
  into Sindarin. Much vocabulary is also missing: we don't know
  words for simple things like "because" or "please".
- Many people have worked to fill the gaps in our knowledge
  with educated guesses and resolve the contradictions.
- The more we reconstruct, the more we can say, but the less likely
  our use of the language is to resemble Tolkien's vision.
  
Possible approaches to Sindarin
- Our modern imagination of fantasy elves as immortal or long-lived beings,
  of roughly human stature, and somehow attuned to or connected with Nature,
  comes directly from Tolkien.
- In learning Sindarin, we must at some point confront the differences between
  ourselves and the fictitious original speakers of the language, especially
  as regards our relationship with the natural world, because this relationship
  also suggests a range of possible approaches to studying Elvish languages.
- The field biologist's approach: observe but don't interfere. This approach
  involves combing through Tolkien's constantly evolving, often cryptic
  writings on Sindarin and documenting how his conception of the language changed
  over time. Examples of this approach include the journals _Vinyar Tengwar_ and
  _Parma Eldalamberon_.
- The birdfeeder approach: interfere enough to make the inherent beauty
  of the language easily accessible. David Salo is the master of this approach,
  as exemplified in the Sindarin dialogue and lyrics he wrote for the _Lord of
  the Rings_ films, and his book _A Gateway to Sindarin_.
- The agriculture approach: make the language useful, possibly at the
  expense of beauty. Almost everyone who writes long texts in Sindarin or tries
  to become "conversant" in the language inevitably falls into this camp. A
  good course that follows this approach is Thorsten Renk's _Pedin Edhellen_.
- The capitalist approach: make the language profitable. Corporations like Palantir that use
  Elvish phrases and Tolkienian imagery in their branding fall
  into this category.

This book falls into the "birdfeeder" camp. The emphasis is on the unique
aesthetic pleasures of Sindarin rather than how to make it useful.

Scope and purpose of the book. Comparison
to other learning resources.
What the reader can expect.
- describe a "completed" reconstruction of Sindarin, but mark
  the words and grammar that are not attested in Tolkien's notes.
- document post-Tolkien words and forms that are in widespread
  use but have been deprecated by recent discoveries. E.g. "le hannon",
  "go" as a preposition, "-ch" for second person singular, all
  of which were used in the Lord of the Rings films because they
  were the best guesses we had to go on at the time.
- Many other resources and tutorials exist, but all have weaknesses.
  They either lack descriptions of pronunciation, or they are out of
  date, or they do not cover the Elvish writing system, or they
  are too technical for beginners, or some combination of these.
- For a thorough, technical treatment of Sindarin (albeit one not
  recently updated), you might want to look at Helge Fauskanger's
  articles on his site Ardalambion, or David Salo's book _A Gateway
  to Sindarin_. For discussions of dialectical variation in 
  Sindarin, Fiona Jallings' _A Fan's Guide to Neo-Sindarin_ is
  recommended. A good introductory course is _Pedin Edhellen_ by
  Thorsten Renk, who also has more in-depth and technical articles
  on his site Parma Tyelpelassiva.

Typographical conventions.
- Sindarin words and phrases are in `bold italics`. If you see Elvish
  words that are in light italics _like this_, they are in another
  Elvish language, most often Quenya.
- An asterisk (\*) marks a reconstructed form.
- Sometimes, a whole grammar rule is uncertain. The headings for these
  sections are marked by asterisks.
- A dagger (&dagger;) marks a reconstructed form that was once in widespread
  use, but is now known to be unsupported by Tolkien's writings. Depending
  on your goals for learning the language, you might want to avoid these
  forms. You should still know about them, though, or much fan-written Sindarin
  will be unintelligible to you!
- Linguistics terms are introduced [.term in small capitals]. You can
  do a web search for these terms to learn more about them. Wikipedia
  is often a good resource for linguistics information.

GLOSSARY OF LINGUISTICS TERMS

Phonemes and Graphemes. Voicing. POA. Parts of speech.
Verb tenses and moods.

INTRODUCTION

1. Brief history of the language and speakers;
   distinctive features of Sindarin vs. Quenya. Consonant
   and vowel mutation.
2. Phrasebook: narrative introducing some common, easily-
   pronounced Sindarin words and phrases.

PRONUNCIATION GUIDE

Table of Sindarin graphemes and their
pronunciations. Vowel length. Stress.

WRITING SYSTEMS

1. English Runes
2. Angerthas Daeron: History and Usage. Intro to
   phonology (voiced vs. unvoiced, POA).
3. Tengwar: brief history of the writing system.
   The organization of the letters.
   Variability among Tengwar modes.
   Possible approaches to an English mode.
4. Full explication of the Sindarin Tengwar modes.
5. Phrasebook of inscriptions.

GRAMMAR

1. Imperative verbs. Purpose of the stem form of verbs.
   Direct objects and lenition. The definite article.
   The Vocative particle 'a'. Object pronouns.
2. Possession (genitive construction, pronouns). Subtleties
   of the definite article with possessive pronouns.
8. Indirect objects. Indirect object pronouns.
9. Need and want. Gerunds. The verb `boe`.
3. "to be" sentences: describing, equating, stating
   existence. Subject pronouns. Use of the definite article
   with subjects. Role of mutation and word order in distinguishing
   these sentences from noun phrases.
9. Yes/no questions.
4. Attributive adjectives. Adjectives used as nouns (c.f. "i galen"
   for "the green one" in Pedin Edhellen)
5. I-affection plurals. Plural definite article,
   nasal mutation, adjective agreement.
   What happens when different mutations conflict.
6. Class plural. Stem changing of nouns. Differences in the usage
   of `-ath` and `pan` (see Pedin Edhellen)
7. Conjunctions `ar`/`ah` and `egor`
8. Prepositions. Mixed, Stop, and Liquid mutations. Definite
   form of prepositions.

---

6. A-stem and I-stem verbs. Present tense of verbs. Personal pronoun inflections.
7. Future tenses of verbs. Volitive vs. non-volitive future. Future "will be"
8. Verbs of perception. Infinitives. (`laston in edhil linno`)
9. The present active participle
10. The passive participle
11. The perfect active participle
8. Negation (of verbs, adjectives, and nouns).
10. WH-questions.
11. Comparative and Superlative adjectives.
12. Past tense of A-verbs.
13. Past tense of I-verbs. Stem-changing verbs (?)
14. Past tense "was", "were"
14. Relative clauses. Nominative relative pronouns (i/in) and dative (ai)
15. Sentence-level conjunctions. (because, while, if, etc.)
16. Sequences of events in time. (before, after, then, etc.)
16. Irregular plurals.
17. Passive voice
18. Subjunctive
19. Numbers

---

14. Forming new words. Derivational endings. Compound words.
    Reconstruction from primitive roots.

HISTORICAL VOCABULARY

QUICK REFERENCE

Mutation chart. Reverse mutation chart.
Conjugation of verbs. Pronouns. Prepositions
and their mutations.
